Added secret response and request headers (#761)
kgateway-dev/kgateway.dev: assets/docs/pages/traffic-management/header-control/request-header.md

   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}

{{< version include-if="2.3.x" >}}

> ## Use a value from a Secret {#header-from-secret}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Source a header value from a Secret {#header-from-secret}
```

> If the header value is sensitive, such as a backend API key or a tenant credential, you might not want to commit it to a manifest in plain text. You can source a request header value from a Kubernetes Secret by replacing `value` with `secretRef` on a `set` or `add` entry in a {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}}. kgateway resolves the Secret at translation time, so the value never appears in the policy spec. If the Secret changes later, kgateway re-translates the affected policies automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the header value is sensitive, such as a backend API key or a tenant credential, you might not want to commit it to a manifest in plain text or send it as part of the request. You can source a request header value from a Kubernetes Secret by replacing `value` with `secretRef` in the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource. The gateway proxy resolves the Secret at translation time, so the value never appears in the policy spec. If the Secret changes later, the proxy applies the changes automatically.
```

{{< callout type="info" >}}

> This option is available only on the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}}. The Gateway API `HTTPRoute` `RequestHeaderModifier` filter does not support `secretRef`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option is available only on the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource. The Gateway API `HTTPRoute` `RequestHeaderModifier` filter does not support the `secretRef` option.
```

{{< /callout >}}

1. Create a Secret that holds the values you want to inject. The data keys do not need to match the eventual header names.
   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Secret
   metadata:
     name: backend-creds
     namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
   type: Opaque
   stringData:
     api-key: my-secret-api-key
     tenant-id: tenant-abc
   EOF
   ```

2. Create an HTTPRoute for the httpbin app. The example selects the http Gateway that you created before you began.
   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: HTTPRoute
   metadata:
     name: httpbin-headers
     namespace: httpbin
   spec:
     parentRefs:
     - name: http
       namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
     hostnames:
       - headers.example
     rules:
       - backendRefs:
           - name: httpbin
             port: 8000
   EOF
   ```

> 3. Create a {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} that sets two request headers from the `backend-creds` Secret. The following example attaches the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} to the http Gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource that sets two request headers values from keys that you stored in the `backend-creds` Secret. The following example attaches the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} to the http Gateway.
```

   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy-apiversion.md" >}}
   kind: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}}
   metadata:
     name: httpbin-secret-headers
     namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
   spec:
     targetRefs:
     - group: gateway.networking.k8s.io
       kind: Gateway
       name: http
     headerModifiers:
       request:
         set:
         - name: X-Api-Key
           secretRef:
             name: backend-creds
             key: api-key
         - name: X-Tenant-Id
           secretRef:
             name: backend-creds
             key: tenant-id
   EOF
   ```

>    The {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} `targetRefs` field does not accept a `namespace`. The policy must live in the same namespace as the resource it targets. To scope this example to a single HTTPRoute instead of the whole Gateway, change `kind` to `HTTPRoute` and `name` to the route's name, and create the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} (and the Secret) in the route's namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   |Setting|Description|
   |--|--|
   |`headerModifiers.request.set.name`|The HTTP header name that the upstream service receives. |
   |`headerModifiers.request.set.secretRef.name`|The name of the Kubernetes Secret to read the value from. If the Secret does not exist when the policy is applied, the policy reports `Accepted=False` and the affected route returns a 500 response. |

>    |`headerModifiers.request.set.secretRef.key`|The key in the Secret's `data` to use as the header value. Optional. If `key` is omitted, it defaults to the value of `headerModifiers.request.set.name`. |

Reviewer: so in this example, if there was no key, the header would be `X-Api-Key: X-Api-Key`?

Author: Removed the table and added sections to provide more detailed examples.

curl -vi http://$INGRESS_GW_ADDRESS:8080/headers -H "host: headers.example:8080"
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab tabName="Port-forward for local testing" %}}
```sh
curl -vi localhost:8080/headers -H "host: headers.example"
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Example output:
```json
{
  "headers": {
    "Host": [
      "headers.example:8080"
    ],
    "X-Api-Key": [
      "my-secret-api-key"
    ],
    "X-Tenant-Id": [
      "tenant-abc"
    ],
    ...
  }
}
```

5. Optional: When you are finished, you can clean up the resources that you created.

```sh
kubectl delete httproute httpbin-headers -n httpbin
kubectl delete {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} httpbin-secret-headers -n {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
kubectl delete secret backend-creds -n {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
```

### Field defaulting

The `name` field on a `set` or `add` entry and the `key` field on `secretRef` are both optional, as long as at least one is set. The following table shows how kgateway resolves each combination.

|`name` (header)|`secretRef.key`|Behavior|
|--|--|--|
|`X-Api-Key`|`api-key`|The `X-Api-Key` header is set to the value of the `api-key` data key in the Secret.|

> |`X-Api-Key`|*(omitted)*|The `X-Api-Key` header is set to the value of the `X-Api-Key` data key in the Secret.|

Reviewer: I think we need to revise this as there is no x-ai-key data key

Author: Removed.

> |*(omitted)*|`X-Api-Key`|The `X-Api-Key` header is set to the value of the `X-Api-Key` data key in the Secret.|

Reviewer: how can I omit the name of the header?

Author: Changed the table to example sections.

|*(omitted)*|*(omitted)*|Every entry in the Secret is injected as a request header. Each data key is reused as the header name.|

For example, to mirror every entry in the Secret as a request header without listing them individually:

```yaml
headerModifiers:
  request:
    set:
    - secretRef:

>         name: backend-creds

Reviewer: this is helpful. maybe we need an example for the other cases also :D

Author: Changed the table to example sections.

```

> ### Cross-namespace Secrets {#cross-namespace-secrets}

Reviewer: I think we can remove this. this is basic kube gw API behavior and not special to this featuer

Author: Removed.

{{< callout type="info" >}}
This option is available only on the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource. The Gateway API `HTTPRoute` `RequestHeaderModifier` filter does not support the `secretRef` option.
{{< /callout >}}

1. Create a Secret that holds the values you want to inject. The data keys do not need to match the eventual header names.
   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: v1
   kind: Secret
   metadata:
     name: backend-creds
     namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
   type: Opaque
   stringData:
     api-key: my-secret-api-key
     tenant-id: tenant-abc
   EOF
   ```

2. Create an HTTPRoute for the httpbin app. The example selects the http Gateway that you created before you began.
   ```yaml
   kubectl apply -f- <<EOF
   apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
   kind: HTTPRoute
   metadata:
     name: httpbin-headers
     namespace: httpbin
   spec:
     parentRefs:
     - name: http
       namespace: {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
     hostnames:
       - headers.example
     rules:
       - backendRefs:
           - name: httpbin
             port: 8000
   EOF
   ```

> 3. Create the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource that sets two request headers values from keys that you stored in the `backend-creds` Secret. The following example attaches the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} to the http Gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} resource that sets two request header values from keys that you stored in the `backend-creds` Secret. The following example attaches the {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} to the http Gateway.
```

{{< tabs items="Cloud Provider LoadBalancer,Port-forward for local testing" tabTotal="2" >}}
{{% tab tabName="Cloud Provider LoadBalancer" %}}
```sh
curl -vi http://$INGRESS_GW_ADDRESS:8080/headers -H "host: headers.example:8080"
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab tabName="Port-forward for local testing" %}}
```sh
curl -vi localhost:8080/headers -H "host: headers.example"
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

Example output:
```json
{
  "headers": {
    "Host": [
      "headers.example:8080"
    ],
    "X-Api-Key": [
      "my-secret-api-key"
    ],
    "X-Tenant-Id": [
      "tenant-abc"
    ],
    ...
  }
}
```

5. Optional: When you are finished, you can clean up the resources that you created.

```sh
kubectl delete httproute httpbin-headers -n httpbin
kubectl delete {{< reuse "docs/snippets/trafficpolicy.md" >}} httpbin-secret-headers -n {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
kubectl delete secret backend-creds -n {{< reuse "docs/snippets/namespace.md" >}}
```

### Field defaulting

> The `name` field on a `set` or `add` entry and the `key` field on `secretRef` are both optional, as long as at least one is set. How kgateway resolves a header value depends on which combination of fields you provide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `name` field on a `set` or `add` entry and the `key` field on `secretRef` are both optional, as long as at least one is set. How the gateway proxy resolves a header value depends on which combination of fields you provide.
```

> #### `name` and `secretRef.key` both set

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Header `name` and `secretRef.key` both set
```

> kgateway sets the `name` header to the value of the `secretRef.key` data key in the Secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example defines both a name for the header (`request.set.name`) and a data key from your Secret (`secretRef.key`). The gateway proxy uses both to construct the resulting request header. In this example, the resulting request header is `X-Api-Key=api-key`. 
```

```yaml
headerModifiers:
  request:
    set:
    - name: X-Api-Key
      secretRef:
        name: backend-creds
        key: api-key
```

#### `secretRef.key` omitted

> kgateway sets the `name` header to the value of the Secret data key that matches `name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the data key is omitted from the `secretRef` block. The gateway proxy uses the header name (`X-Api-Key`) to look up a data key in the referenced Secret that matches the header name. Then, it uses the header name and matched data value from the Secret to construct the request header. 
```

Reviewer: we should mention what happens if no match is found

```yaml
headerModifiers:
  request:
    set:
    - name: X-Api-Key
      secretRef:
        name: backend-creds
```

> #### `name` omitted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Header `name` omitted
```

> kgateway sets a header named after `secretRef.key` to the value of that data key in the Secret.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the name of the header is omitted, but a data key is referenced in the `secretRef` block. The gateway proxy looks up the data key from the Secret and injects it into a header with the same name as the data key. In the following example, the resulting request header is `api-key: api-key`. 
```

```yaml
headerModifiers:
  request:
    set:
    - secretRef:
        name: backend-creds
        key: api-key
```

> #### Both `name` and `secretRef.key` omitted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Header `name` and `secretRef.key` omitted
```

> kgateway injects every entry in the Secret as a request header. Each data key becomes a header name. Use this combination to mirror an entire Secret into headers without listing each entry individually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example omits both the header name and the data key in the secret. In such cases, the gateway proxy injects every data key entry in the Secret as a request header. Each data key becomes a header name. Use this combination to mirror an entire Secret into headers without listing each entry individually.
```
